# Summary

This is a chainloader for easing Litex FPGA TFTP bootloading workflow when you frequently run into any of the following:
* Your software image files change size.
* Your software image files change destination address.
* You add or remove software image files.
* Other conditions that require you to regenerate your FPGA bitstream due to software being embedded within it.

This has only been tested with the VexRiscV / Arty / Linux port, but conceptually at least it should cross over to the other cpu's and OS's.

# To Build:
* Set these environment variables:
    * ***SOC_BUILD_DIR*** : output dir of your soc's build products (where the gateware and software output directories are)
    * ***SOC_TFTP_SERVER_IP*** : 10,0,0,1 (or whatever you wish... - note the commas)
    * ***SOC_TFTP_CLIENT_IP*** : 10,0,0,2 (or whatever you wish... - note the commas)
    * ***SOC_TFTP_SERVER_PORT*** : 69 (or whatever you wish)


* Set ***chloader_loc*** in chainloader.ld to match your system (there is a TODO below to make this dynamic)

* run make


# To Use:
  *  Generate a ***boot.manifest*** text file which should look something like the below. The ***boot.manifest*** is the list of files the netbooter will pull from the TFTP server. It also includes each file's destination address and and length. Generate this as a part of your build process. Make sure to regenerate it whenever rebuilding buildroot, emulator.bin, your SOC or your devicetree.

```
download emulator.bin 0x20000000 8776
download rv32.dtb 0xc0ff0000 1885
download Image 0xc0000000 4676580
download rootfs.cpio 0xc1000000 15118848
boot 0x20000000
end
```

  * Place the ***boot.manifest*** and *any referenced files* in your TFTP server directory. your folder should look something like the below.
```
  ls -l tftp_root/arty
    total 19360
    -rw-rw-r-- 1 someuser someuser      168 Jun 26 21:27 boot.manifest
    -rw-rw-r-- 1 someuser someuser     8776 Jun 26 21:27 emulator.bin
    -rw-r--r-- 1 someuser someuser  4676580 Jun 26 21:27 Image
    -rw-r--r-- 1 someuser someuser 15118848 Jun 26 21:27 rootfs.cpio
    -rw-rw-r-- 1 someuser someuser     1885 Jun 26 21:27 rv32.dtb
```


  * Run a TFTP server (one is included). If using the included TFTP server, place files in a subdirectory named after a 'class' eg - arty. The included TFTP server will route different folders different hosts based on the internal ip->class dictionary. Presumably this behaviour could be used to target specific devices with different software images.

  * Boot up the FPGA bitstream.

  * ```litex_term --speed <baudrate> <tty> --kernel $SOC_BUILD_DIR/software/chainloader/chainloader.bin --kernel-adr CHAINLOADER_BIN-address```

  * This should result in the standard Litex bios booting up, followed by loading the chainloader (via serial), and then followed by a TFTP boot (via the chainloader) of whatever OS and/or data you have put into the manifest.

# TODO:
  * chainloader.ld ( ***CHAINLOADER_BIN*** ) : the ***CHAINLOADER_BIN*** address should be autogenerated to point somewhere in the last section of your soc's SDRAM region - as included it is set up for an arty (the end of it's 256MiB SDRAM space). I noticed hangs when trying to overlay the chainloader @ the standard SDRAM address (0xc00000000), hence why I decided to move it 'out of the way'. I'm guessing it had interfered with the *bios's* stack.

  * Improve cross platform story

  * Some of the code was copied out of the Litex bios. Perhaps we can integrate it back in.

  * IP addresses are fixed in the bitstream. Short of DHCP which sounds complicated - not sure how to fix this, ATM..

  * We probably could/should get the flash booter using the manifest.

  * Add hashes to the manifest ?
